CHRONOLOGY OF NIGERIA
9000 BCE Late Stone Age evidence of indigenous habitation in Iwo Eleru rock shelter in southwestern Nigeria.
600 BCE Evidence of iron technology used by Nok civilization, near present-day Abuja.
1000–1500 CE Foundation of centralized states such as Kanem, Borno, Benin, Ife, Oyo, and the Hausa city states.
1100–1400 CE Introduction of Islam into savanna and Sahelian states of northern Nigeria.
1300–1600 The ‘‘golden age’’ of the trans-Saharan trade. Gold,slaves, and other commodities are traded from the states of northern Nigeria across the Sahara desert to the states of the north African littoral, Europe, and the Middle East. The trans-Saharan trade continued through the nineteenth century, but in a diminished capacity after the rise of direct trade with Europeans on the coast in the fifteenth century AD.
1450–1850 Contacts with Europeans on the coast result in monumental changes to the political, economic, and social institutions of southern Nigerian states. The trade in slaves dominates relations between Nigerians and Europeans at this time, changing for ever the histories of four continents as goods and people engaged in a growing transatlantic trade.
1804 Beginning of Islamic revolution that results in the creation of the Sokoto Caliphate in northern Nigeria. The Sokoto Caliphate expands the frontiers of Islam and spread the religion beyond the ruling classes to common people to a greater extent than existed previously.
1807 British abolition of the slave trade. Although the trade in slaves continues from southern Nigerian ports for another forty years, trade in palm oil and other forms of ‘‘legitimate’’ commerce expand rapidly from thispoint.
1833 Final collapse of Oyo empire, which marks the beginning of sixty years of instability and war among Yoruba states in the southwest.
1841 The Niger Expedition marks the first attempt by Europeans and African Christians to spread Christianity into the interior of Nigeria. In 1846 Church Missionary Society (CMS) missionaries establish a mission at Abeokuta; from this point Christianity begins to spread rapidly in southern Nigeria for the first time. A new elite emerges in the south, educated in European mission schools and sharing many European cultural attributes. Christianity and Islam have since become the two dominant religions in Nigeria.
1861 British annexation of Lagos as a Crown Colony.
1885 Establishment of the Oil Rivers Protectorate in southeastern Nigeria, renamed the Niger Coast Protectorate in 1893.
1886 Formation of the Royal Niger Company (RNC), which monopolizes trade in the Niger basin until the revocation of its charter in 1900. In the same year a peace treaty is signed, ending the prolonged war among the Yoruba-speaking peoples of the southwest.
1887 King Ja Ja of Opobo exiled to the West Indies for abrogation of Treaty of Protection.
1893 Establishment of a British protectorate over Yoruba territories in the southwest.
1894 Revolt of Brassmen against the Royal Niger Company. In the same year, Nana, the Itsekiri governor of the river Benin, is deposed and deported for hindering British access to interior markets.
1898–1909 Ekumeku underground resistance movement fights against the RNC and British colonial rule.
1900 Creation of the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria. Extension of the northern protectorate concludes in 1903, when British forces conquer the Sokoto Caliphate and kill the Sultan.
1902–3 The Aro Expedition, part of the British effort to ‘‘pacify’’ the hinterlands of eastern Nigeria.
1908 Protests in Lagos against the water rate, fueled by the reporting of Nigerian journalists such as Herbert Macaulay, often dubbed the ‘‘father of Nigerian nationalism.’’ Macaulay and other journalists use newspapers to report on and critique the performance of the colonial government.
1912 Establishment of the Southern Nigeria Civil Service Union, later renamed the Nigerian Civil Servants Union.
1914 Amalgamation of northern and southern protectorates.
1914–18 Nigerian troops aid the British cause in the First World War.
1920 National Congress of British West Africa (NCBWA) founded.
1923 Establishment of the Clifford Constitution, which allows for elected representation in the governance of Nigeria for the first time.
1925 West African Students’ Union (WASU) founded.
1929 The ‘‘Women’s War,’’ or Aba Riots, a major protest against British indirect rule in southeastern Nigeria.
1931 Establishment of the Nigerian Union of Teachers (NUT).
1936 Nigerian Youth Movement (NYM), a political organization of young nationalists in the Lagos area, founded.
1944 Nnamdi Azikiwe founds the NCNC, the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (later Nigerian Citizens), which quickly becomes an influential political party pushing for independence for Nigeria from British colonial rule. In the same year Mrs. Olufunmilayo Ransome-Kuti founds the Abeokuta Ladies’ Club, later renamed the Abeokuta Women’s Union (AWU), to lobby against the injustices of colonial indirect rule.
1945 Nigerian labor unions organize a General Strike, bringing work and business to a standstill. The strike precipitates important economic changes in the form of the first Ten Year Plan, adopted later the same year.
1946 The Richards Constitution enacted, providing a central legislature and dividing Nigeria into three regions: the North, West, and East. This is the first set of constitutional reforms that ultimately leads to independence for Nigeria.
1948 First university in Nigeria established in Ibadan.
1949 Northern People’s Congress (NPC) founded under the leadership of Tafawa Balewa, Aminu Kano, and Ahmadu Bello, the Sardauna of Sokoto.
1951 The MacPherson Constitution amends the Richards Constitution, moving Nigeria closer to independence. In the same year the Action Group (AG), a Yoruba-dominated political party in the southwest, is founded under the leadership of Obafemi Awolowo.
1954 The Lyttleton Constitution establishes a federal system of government for Nigeria.
1956 Petroleum discovered in the Niger delta region.
1957 Regional self-government attained in the East and West.
1959 Regional self-government attained in the North.
1960 Nigeria becomes independent from the United Kingdom on October 1.
1963 Nigeria becomes a republic, replacing the queen with an indigenous president as the symbolic head of state.
1966 Military coup on January 15 brings down the First Republic and installs General John Aguiyi-Ironsi as head of state. Countercoup on July 29 brings General Yakubu Gowon to power.
1967 Emeka Ojukwu declares independence of Eastern Region as the sovereign Republic of Biafra on May 30. In the same year Gowon creates twelve states out of the existing three regions. From this point, clamor for the creation of more states becomes constant. Since 2000 Nigeria has been made up of thirty-six states and a Federal Capital Territory (FCT) at Abuja.